Upgrading
=========

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

Upgrading to 2.1 from 2.0
-------------------------
Version 2.1 of the Datastax python driver for Apache Cassandra
adds support for Cassandra 2.1 and version 3 of the native protocol.

Cassandra 1.2, 2.0, and 2.1 are all supported.  However, 1.2 only
supports protocol version 1, and 2.0 only supports versions 1 and
2, so some features may not be available.

Using the v3 Native Protocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
By default, the driver will attempt to use version 2 of the
native protocol.  To use version 3, you must explicitly
set the :attr:`~.Cluster.protocol_version`:

.. code-block:: python

    from cassandra.cluster import Cluster

    cluster = Cluster(protocol_version=3)

Note that protocol version 3 is only supported by Cassandra 2.1+.

In future releases, the driver may default to using protocol version
3.

Working with User-Defined Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Cassandra 2.1 introduced the ability to define new types::

    USE KEYSPACE mykeyspace;

    CREATE TYPE address (street text, city text, zip int);

The driver generally expects you to use instances of a specific
class to represent column values of this type.  You can let the
driver know what class to use with :meth:`.Cluster.register_user_type`:

.. code-block:: python

    cluster = Cluster()

    class Address(object):

        def __init__(self, street, city, zipcode):
            self.street = street
            self.city = text
            self.zipcode = zipcode

    cluster.register_user_type('mykeyspace', 'address', Address)

When inserting data for ``address`` columns, you should pass in
instances of ``Address``.  When querying data, ``address`` column
values will be instances of ``Address``.

If no class is registered for a user-defined type, query results
will use a ``namedtuple`` class and data may only be inserted
though prepared statements.

See :ref:`udts` for more details.

Customizing Encoders for Non-prepared Statements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Starting with version 2.1 of the driver, it is possible to customize
how python types are converted to CQL literals when working with
non-prepared statements.  This is done on a per-:class:`~.Session`
basis through :attr:`.Session.encoder`:

.. code-block:: python

    cluster = Cluster()
    session = cluster.connect()
    session.encoder.mapping[tuple] = session.encoder.cql_encode_tuple

See :ref:`type-conversions` for the table of default CQL literal conversions.

Using Client-Side Protocol-Level Timestamps
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
With version 3 of the native protocol, timestamps may be supplied by the
client at the protocol level.  (Normally, if they are not specified within
the CQL query itself, a timestamp is generated server-side.)

When :attr:`~.Cluster.protocol_version` is set to 3 or higher, the driver
will automatically use client-side timestamps with microsecond precision
unless :attr:`.Session.use_client_timestamp` is changed to :const:`False`.
If a timestamp is specified within the CQL query, it will override the
timestamp generated by the driver.

Upgrading to 2.0 from 1.x
-------------------------
Version 2.0 of the DataStax python driver for Apache Cassandra
includes some notable improvements over version 1.x.  This version
of the driver supports Cassandra 1.2, 2.0, and 2.1.  However, not
all features may be used with Cassandra 1.2, and some new features
in 2.1 are not yet supported.

Using the v2 Native Protocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
By default, the driver will attempt to use version 2 of Cassandra's
native protocol. You can explicitly set the protocol version to
2, though:

.. code-block:: python

    from cassandra.cluster import Cluster

    cluster = Cluster(protocol_version=2)

When working with Cassandra 1.2, you will need to
explicitly set the :attr:`~.Cluster.protocol_version` to 1:

.. code-block:: python

    from cassandra.cluster import Cluster

    cluster = Cluster(protocol_version=1)

Automatic Query Paging
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Version 2 of the native protocol adds support for automatic query
paging, which can make dealing with large result sets much simpler.

See :ref:`query-paging` for full details.

Protocol-Level Batch Statements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
With version 1 of the native protocol, batching of statements required
using a `BATCH cql query <http://cassandra.apache.org/doc/cql3/CQL.html#batchStmt>`_.
With version 2 of the native protocol, you can now batch statements at
the protocol level. This allows you to use many different prepared
statements within a single batch.

See :class:`~.query.BatchStatement` for details and usage examples.

SASL-based Authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Also new in version 2 of the native protocol is SASL-based authentication.
See the section on :ref:`security` for details and examples.

Lightweight Transactions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
`Lightweight transactions <http://www.datastax.com/dev/blog/lightweight-transactions-in-cassandra-2-0>`_ are another new feature.  To use lightweight transactions, add ``IF`` clauses
to your CQL queries and set the :attr:`~.Statement.serial_consistency_level`
on your statements.

Calling Cluster.shutdown()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In order to fix some issues around garbage collection and unclean interpreter
shutdowns, version 2.0 of the driver requires you to call :meth:`.Cluster.shutdown()`
on your :class:`~.Cluster` objects when you are through with them.
This helps to guarantee a clean shutdown.

Deprecations
^^^^^^^^^^^^
The following functions have moved from ``cassandra.decoder`` to ``cassandra.query``.
The original functions have been left in place with a :exc:`DeprecationWarning` for
now:

* :attr:`cassandra.decoder.tuple_factory` has moved to
  :attr:`cassandra.query.tuple_factory`
* :attr:`cassandra.decoder.named_tuple_factory` has moved to
  :attr:`cassandra.query.named_tuple_factory`
* :attr:`cassandra.decoder.dict_factory` has moved to
  :attr:`cassandra.query.dict_factory`
* :attr:`cassandra.decoder.ordered_dict_factory` has moved to
  :attr:`cassandra.query.ordered_dict_factory`

Dependency Changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The following dependencies have officially been made optional:

* ``scales``
* ``blist``

And one new dependency has been added (to enable Python 3 support):

* ``six``
